Hey everyone, Charles from Letto here.
So today I'm going to be going over
context repositories. It's a brand new
feature we just shipped in Leticode a
few days ago and yeah, it's a pretty big
feature. It's a very kind of fundamental
overhaul to the way memory works inside
of Leticode. Uh and we're super excited
about it. I think it basically makes
your agents much more capable at
maintaining a very large memory system
and then also making very big
significant changes to the memory. So
what we've noticed is for agents that
have context repositories enabled
basically they're able to much more
easily like reorganize their memory um
in very significant ways and then they
generally seem to be much better at also
making good memories. So in this video
I'm going to go over the blog post that
we released and this is more of just
explaining like what context
repositories are, how they work, why
it's different from the previous system
um called memory blocks and I'm also
going to go over a demo. So, if you're
interested in just the demo part, um
check the time stamps in the description
and you can just jump ahead to that. But
I'm going to start with the blog first
since uh context repositories are very
different from memory blocks. Um they
connect so they they are related to each
other, but it's a significant enough
change that I think it it's for those
that are interested, it's um worth
diving into the details of how it works
and what makes it so much better. A
truss from the future teleporting back
into the beginning of the video. Uh, and
I kind of just wanted to quickly
showcase like what context repositories
actually looks like. Um, so if you're
interested in just jumping to the actual
like implementation details, um, you
know, what does it look like to see kind
of like the layout of your context and
then also I think more importantly kind
of see these edits that are happening
that are like kind of these getbacked
edits. So yeah, all the memory edits are
now tracked and you can kind of see all
the all the changes your memory agents
are making um to the memory in a very
clean way. So yeah, if you kind of want
to just see what this looks like in
practice, u jump ahead. I'll leave
timestamps in the description and what
I'm going to do immediately next is go
over the blog post. Um but yeah, again,
if you're interested just in the
implementation, just in how it works, um
go ahead and like jump ahead till later
in the video. Okay, so firstly, what
even is a context repository? Uh
basically it's git based memory. So it's
memory that is tracked through git and
it is edited through more natural like
bash and file editing tools as opposed
to specific memory tools which is the
way that memory blocks works. Okay.
Okay, so a very important thing to call
out here is that context repositories it
exposes the memory as files to the agent
but it's not like the memory is just
files in let code context repositories
it is taking all the memories of the
agent that actually are stored in memory
blocks and it's kind of transplanting it
onto the machine that you're on so that
the agent can manipulate the memory much
more easily. Uh so this is really all
about putting memory that lives with the
agent. It's kind of like the server side
state. So it is very it's like not if
your computer caches on fire and you
know your context repository kind of
vanishes because your hard drive is
destroyed. It's not like you lost your
agent. The agent is kind of still living
in the API server and has all its
memories. It's more that the the
memories have all kind of been
synchronized into the local file system.
And through being synchronized to the
local file system, uh you get a lot of
nice properties. Uh so yeah that's
basically what the blog post is about.
Okay so to kind of illustrate the
concrete difference between like the
expressiveness of memory tools and more
general computer use tools like bash. Uh
let's justam imagine this example of you
know an agent that maybe has been
chatting like my personal agent. So it
maybe has a ton of memories about me and
in all of those memories my name is
Charles. So there's all these instances
of you know Charles did this, Charles
did that, Charles likes this, Charles
doesn't like this. Now let's say one day
I tell my agent actually um I don't want
to be called Charles, I want to be
called Optimus Prime. Okay, so in the
more traditional framework um this sort
of operation is going to be done through
a string replace tool. So the agent is
going to call a tool like string replace
um or sorry memory replace and it's
going to take an old string and a new
string and then generally this will also
in like let us system it takes some sort
of path um either like a path or a
label.
Okay, so imagine we have this memory
block or this memory fragment or memory
file or whatever you want to call it,
but there's some sort of like piece of
memory and it's in token space and it
says Charles really likes Cyberpunk Edge
Runners. And the agent now is going to
call memory replace on this block um the
block ID, you know, it could be an ID,
it could be a a path, you know, whatever
it is, it's going to call replace
Charles with Optimus Prime. And this
will execute on the server or wherever,
you know, these memories are stored. And
the output of this is going to be now
the new memory is Optimus Prime really
likes cyberpunk catch runners. And sure
this is okay. I mean this is like
basically the way that uh megpt works.
You know this the original research
paper we wrote a while ago. Um this is
kind of the way that like memory works
in basically all the modern chatbot
systems. It's all like the mem GPT style
memory where there's some sort of like
memory bank. Um, and you can think of
those as memory blocks in Leta. And the
agent, it kind of has control of those
memory blocks. Um, it can either append,
replace, uh, delete. In this case, it's
going to do a memory replace to replace
Charles with Optimus Prime. Okay. So,
where does this break down? Well, you
know, this kind of works if or it's like
very easy to conceptualize if there is
only like one memory. Um, but you can
imagine like, you know, if an agent is
maintaining a very good memory system
and it's learning a lot about me. If
we've been chatting for a very long
time, you know, it's not just going to
have one file or one like memory block
about preferences. It's also going to
know a lot about like maybe my style, my
location that I generally am in, my
appearance, my hobbies, my friends. You
know, this can kind of go on forever.
Um, and you can have, let's say you have
like n total different files or
different memory blocks. And these are
all just for me, right? There's like
there going to be a ton of stuff from
the agent itself, um, for like other
things like organizations, work, you
know, whatever. So now what's going to
happen here is the agent is actually
going to have to like call this tool
memory replace a bunch of times. It's
going to have to call it end times. Um,
so instead of just calling it once, the
agent's going to have to call it end
times. And like agents, you know, these
days they have the ability to do
parallel tool calling. So sure, you
know, the agent can kind of call a bunch
of tools in parallel,
you know, it can call them on different
files. U, but at the same time, this is
like limited. It's not like an agent
that's going to dump 100 parallel tool
calls uh at once. And then it's also
just like kind of redundant, right? I
think you know realistically what you'd
want to do is you'd want to like support
maybe the memory replace function it
this memory tool it has like a wildcard
operator and then the wild card operator
allows you to like match into like
everything inside of humans. Um so you
know you you can potentially make like
the memory tools much more complex to
make it a lot easier to do like these
batch operations. Okay, so maybe you're
thinking, you know,
that doesn't sound that bad. Like, was
this really going to ever happen? Um,
I'm not convinced that this is, you
know, what you're about to show me with
like bash is going to be better than
like this memory place tool. Uh, I think
another example I can give you is let's
imagine, you know, this friends folder.
Yeah, let's imagine this friends folder
has, you know, Bob, Alice, and like a p
total friends. And let's say I'm super
popular and I have like 1,000 friends.
Um well, you know what happens if the
agent decides one day, you know, I
actually think that each of these
friends, you know, they're starting to
maybe they're directly interacting with
me and now I don't want it to be like
human and then friends as this like nest
organization. Instead, actually, I want
to give every single person in friends
their own human like directory, right?
Okay. So to be concrete, basically we're
trying to like unpack friends and pull
it out. And we want to basically say
that like now there Oh, and actually
let's change this. Oops.
So now it's not human, it's humans. And
then I also want to say that like Alice
and Bob, they they're not just like
friends of Charles, they got their own
dedicated top level memory organization.
Um, so it's going to be Alice, Bob,
Charles, and then maybe like a bunch of
other friends. Okay, maybe let's say
there's a thousand of them. They're all
going to get unpacked into the humans
directory. Okay, so maybe now you're
starting to see like the potential
problem here. Like what is going to be
involved in this case if we only have a
tool called memory replace? Okay, well
now you know the agent is going to have
to do like a bunch of label edits. So
let's say this memory block you know
human/prefs
this is actually represented as you know
a label in the database as human
for/pres
and let's say that you can actually
replace labels and in in um and in leta
when you use memory blocks uh there's
actually a memory tool and the memory
tool I think just look like this it's
kind of the memory omni tool and you
have the ability to change the label so
you have the ability to kind of like say
okay I'm going to make the old label
this and then And the new label is this.
But notice immediately there's kind of
this like very disturbing thing that
happened which is that you know all I
did was at a high level concept level I
decided you know we don't it's no longer
just human it's humans. We have many
different humans. Um but the
organization here like how many like
kind of atomic operations happened? Well
we did an unpacking of the P friends you
know to the top and then we also renamed
this human to humans. So that's like P
operations to unpack and then it is one
operation to go from human to humans. So
it's kind of like P plus one. But if the
way that we can kind of like change the
directory structure or like the
organizational structure is actually
through modifying the labels with this
memory tool, you're actually going to
have to do many more than just like P
plus one operations because you're going
to have to touch every single memory
that's inside of human. Like just
because we modified the directory or
it's not really like a real directory,
it's more like a concept directory. Just
because we modified that one directory,
we are having to touch every single
memory, right? Okay. So that actually
like seems pretty problematic. Um and I
I would actually kind of agree that like
you know it is a problem if an agent
can't do this efficiently. And I think
what ends up happening when agents can't
really do this efficiently is the agent
kind of like is aware of its kind of
limitations in some way. What seems like
it should be a simple renaming ends up
becoming like way too complex. Uh I
think with with memory blocks what you
see is that the agents just never do
this like the agents never do this like
really big um reorganization you know
really big but just changing like a
label here and there um because because
it's actually just like very expensive
to do something that should be pretty
simple and when I say it should be
pretty simple you know what do I mean
well if you're familiar with Unix um or
kind of like the terminal tools you know
that you can do these things you can do
the command called MB to kind of like
rename a directory. So if we were able
to express memory mutation operations
with bash, then we could do things like
this. So yeah, we could basically just
do a single command um to change the
directory name or you know, again, it's
not like necessarily real directory.
It's kind of a virtual concept
directory, but we can change it from
human to humans with a single bash
command. with the old system of memory
blocks. Uh this actually ends up being
like a very complex amount of like
memory operations with the memory tool.
But if you can modify your memories
through bash, it allows you to do things
like you know the unpacking. The
unpacking also would be a very simple
bash command. You can do unpacking, you
can do reorganization. Uh all these
things are like really really simple. Um
they're kind of like as simple as they
could potentially be. You can kind of
express everything through code. Um, so
all of your memory operations can just
be expressed much more cleanly through
through code. So yeah, that's kind of
what we're saying this part of the blog
post. Basically, what context
repositories allows you to do is kind of
like unfold the virtual memory or kind
of like the remote memory state, put it
into a local file system purely so that
the agent can like manipulate it very
easily. And yeah, again back to the
analogy of kind of a human, you know,
like myself as a human, I generally work
on um this computer, this MacBook I'm
recording from, but I also use like a
lot of different computers. I use like
remote computers, you know, my phone is
a computer, but it's not like, you know,
my memories or myself are living on
those computers or those devices. It's
not like if I lose my phone, I kind of
like lose a fragment of my identity or
like my memories. Instead, like I have
my memories stored inside my brain and
then I use all these devices. And I
think you want to think about agents,
especially stateful agents that uh you
think about more like humans. Uh you
want to think about it in a similar way
with some of these other coding tools or
coding agents. They treat memory like
literally just as local files. And I
think that's kind of like the wrong way
to think about it. It's more that you do
want the memory to become synchronized
with local files so that you can edit it
very easily and do like very very
powerful operations on it. Um but the
memory is still kind of like remote.
Okay. Okay. And then the other very
important part of context repositories
is that they are gitbacked. And this is
the way that we do the synchronization
between the server and uh the local file
system where kind of the memory gets
like transplanted onto um it's all done
via git. So like when you are kind of
pulling down the memory so the agent can
edit it um that's basically just a git
pull. That's all managed by the let code
harness but under the hood it's all
using git. And this has a lot of nice
properties. I think the most relevant
property if you're using Leta code as a
ver as a um personal agent is that all
the memory changes, they're all now
going to be tracked. So let's say you're
using Leta Code and you have a sleep
time um or like reflection agent
enabled, you're actually going to be
able to see all the changes to your
memory that happened when you like
basically weren't looking. So you can
see like what your agent did to your
memory or what sorry I guess what the
agent did to its own memory. And because
it's Git, you can also like roll it
back. You can also have like many
parallel agents all working on the
memory together. And the way that would
work was through git work trees. So
basically by tracking the memory that is
uh that is virtual but sync local it
basically allows you to do a lot of
really really cool things with these
background or sleep time agents. Okay.
So the other important thing to take
away in the blog post is that not all
memories are treated equally. We kind of
had this concept with memory blocks in
that like an agent could create memory
blocks and then it could detach the
memory blocks and then basically like
every memory block um that is attached
is going to be in context. So things
like you know the personality of your
agent you'd always want that to be
attached because you know if the
personality of your agent gets detached
it's not going to be in context. So the
agent like won't act the way you expect,
right? It's not the personality won't
like influence the behavior if it's
just, you know, remote somewhere where
the agent can see it if it like looks it
up. So we have the exact same concept in
context repositories. And the way it
works is that in this virtualized file
system that gets synced down through git
onto the local machine for the agent to
edit, everything that is inside kind of
the system folder, these are all things
that are going to be injected into the
system prompt. So this is the equivalent
of core memory. This is the equivalent
of attached memory blocks, right? So
everything in here, this is always going
to be visible to the agent. It also
means that this is actually all going to
be finite context. You cannot just have
an infinite infinite amount of things
mounted inside of system. But then the
kind of the benefit of this way of doing
progressive disclosure versus the memory
block system is that it allows you to
organize everything that's not inside of
the context window very cleanly. So the
agent will be still be able to see like
all of these memories that are outside
of its context window but everything
that's outside of system these are not
actually going to be injected into the
system prompt only the kind of like
highle tree outline will be. So the
agent if it had this exact you know
context repository memory structure it
would know everything inside of coding
style it's going to see all the time. So
this is always visible but this project
timeline that's inside of history it's
not going to immediately see what's in
here. it would have to like go fetch it
or go read it. And this pairs very very
nicely with the whole mutating memory
with bash because you could imagine like
an agent can basically decide maybe
there's many different humans. Um it can
it can decide like hey I'm no longer
working with this person or maybe this
person I haven't chatted with in a very
long time and I it it used to be very
important for me to like see all this
stuff about them but now I like don't
need to see it. I can kind of like
remove this. I'm not going to delete it.
I'm not gonna like lose it forever, but
I'm just gonna like move this folder
from here to here. And if we do that,
then it no longer is like polluting the
context window. Um, but the agent's like
still very aware of it. Okay, so the
other parts of this blog I'm go over
quickly because I'm actually going to
like showcase it in a demo. But yeah,
basically as I was saying earlier, one
really cool thing about context
repositories is that they allow you to
have these like multi- aent memory
swarms where you can basically have like
many different parallel sub aents in let
code that are all doing edits to memory.
And we actually have an example inside
of the init tool. So if you run init
inside of let code and that's kind of
like it's a it's a pre-built command
that will kind of bootstrap your memory
system. So I I'll show that to you guys.
Um, but if you run that, there's
actually a new thing inside of let code
where Leta Code will see if you've used
cloud code before. It'll see if you've
used codecs before and it'll ask you,
hey, do you want me to like go process
your old codecs or like cloud code
history and try to like learn something
about you? And the way that will work is
it actually will spawn like concurrent
memory sub agents. Each of these memory
sub agents is going to be modifying its
own work tree of memory. it will kind of
check out a work tree um off of like the
main memory and it will work on these
work trees and then those work trees
will kind of get merged as a natural way
to kind of take all the changes that the
different memory agents have made
combine them all and then push it back
to the server to kind of synchronize the
memory back into the agent's brain and
yeah basically there's a lot of built-in
skills inside of let code for doing sort
of memory management so the memory
initialization memory reflection um so
this is the one I'll show you guys today
this whole background ground codeex
cloud code injection thing I think kind
of deserves its own video because
firstly it takes a long time. Um the
memories are really rich. So I think
this kind of this I'll say this for a
different video but the reflection one
I'll I'll show you guys today. And then
there's also a def fragmentation skill
which is the idea that maybe your memory
like ends up getting kind of messy. You
want to occasionally like clean up the
memory, like maybe there's some
duplication here and there that wasn't
caught in real time, but you want to say
like, hey, let's like let's take some
dedicated time to actually clean up this
memory, make it very like concise, and
then maybe also like reevaluate what's
inside of system and what's not inside
of system and kind of move things
around.
Okay, so to briefly show you guys what
kind of memory system looks like, I'm
actually going to load up an old agent.
So this is kind of my daily driver. So
yeah, this agent is Big Chungus the
second. This is kind of uh my main
personal agent that I do a lot of like
dev work with and yeah the the way to
check if context repositories is enabled
is you do for slashmemory
um you hit enter and if context
repositories is enabled what you'll see
is this like file tree uh view of memory
as opposed to if it's not enabled you're
going to see like a block view of
memory. So the way to basically check do
I have um context repositories turned on
is you just do for/memory and then look
for this file system view. You you'll be
able to tell if it's this view or the
other view. Okay. So the other thing
you'll be able to do if you have context
repositories enabled is you should be
able to tap O or like the press O on
your keyboard. Um O for open when you're
on the memory view page. So yeah,
basically when you're on this page, you
know, hit O um for open in browser and
then a browser window should open,
you'll get this local static file
rendering of the memory. So you'll be
able to see kind of like what's in
system, what's in core, the tools, and
then you'll also be able to see uh what
I'll get into later kind of like this
full git history because again context
repositories another really big
advantage over memory blocks is that
they are git tracked. So you can see
like every single change that happened
versus memory blocks weren't natively
like tracked. So you'd have to actually
like implement your own system without
memory blocks to see uh kind of a change
log of like which agent edited which
memory, what did they change versus with
context repositories, it comes like
baked in because it's all git. Okay. So
the way I'm actually demo this is I'm
going to start from scratch. I'm going
to create a brand new agent. If you want
to follow along, uh the way you would do
that is make sure you install leta code
then you run you you can run leta to
follow along with me. Uh basically the
first time you run leta you're going to
be prompted to log in and ooth and once
you do that there are some like free
models you can use uh you can also
connect your own API keys um to use your
own like codeex account or use you know
anthropic API keys things like that.
Okay, so I created a brand new agent. I
actually um renamed this agent to
context repost example just so it's a
little bit more clear what we're doing.
And yeah, if you want to change the
model, um I'm actually going to change
the model here to change the reasoning
setting to be high
for/model
46. I'm going to set it to high. Okay,
so this is a completely uh brand new
agent. If you look at the memory system
with for/memory, it's super bare bones.
Uh, it's basically one memory about
myself, the human, one memory about
itself. So, not much here at all. Um,
kind of bare bones, which is good
because we're going to run the init
command to get started. Okay, so you can
tell like I ran the init command. Uh,
the way this actually works is the agent
has a built-in initializing memory
skill. It loads that skill and yeah, the
agent actually is looking for um
historical session data from cloud and
codeex.
I'm going to let all that run.
Okay. Okay. And the agent actually also
asked like, you know, how long do you
want me to go for? Um, do you want me to
do like a very extensive memory
initialization? Uh, or do you want me to
do something kind of quick? Um, I'm
actually just going to do something
quick for the sake of this video.
Then it's also asking like, am I Charles
Packer? That is me.
And then it's it's also asking me, you
know, I found the cloud code and the
codeex history. Um, do you want me to
analyze it so I can learn from your
preferences? This actually takes a
while. Uh, so I'm going to again, for
the sake of this video, I'm going to
skip it. But this is like super cool.
Um, I think, you know, if you're running
this yourself and you have that session
data, I would definitely recommend
hitting yes, um, the results are like
really, really cool. I think the
memories that come out of searching
through like your history, if you do use
cloud code or you do use codeex, uh, the
memories are really impressive. Um, so I
would definitely recommend doing that,
but I'm going to skip that for now for
the sake of this demo. Okay, I'm
actually just going to put the put the
Asian in YOLO mode. Let this run um, for
a bit.
Okay, so skipping ahead a bit, um you
can see that like you can see that code
is starting to make a lot of changes to
its own memory. Um you can see that all
these changes are happening inside of
the locally synced copy of the memory.
So I think if you had run this
previously without context repositories
enabled, what you'd see is the agent
would be doing a lot of calls to like a
memory tool. So it' be doing like memory
insert, memory replace. Instead, it's
making a lot of calls to like the
standard file editing tools. So, it's
using like bash, write, you know, edit.
It's basically not using any specialized
memory tools at all. It's just using the
same tools that it would use to edit
files on the computer, but it's editing
its memory files inside of the context
repository that are actually kind of
like a local git sync of a remote kind
of uh source of truth memory that with
the source of truth memory that's living
on the server. that's actually what's
getting like put into the system prompt
and everything. Um, but the agent is
actually able to, you know, make much
easier changes to that memory when it
does it locally on this kind of like git
copy as opposed to using like these
these very uh specific memory tools. All
right, so it's finally finished. Um, it
looks like that took 5 minutes. U so
yeah, not a ton of time. Um, kind of
like right on target for I think what
the light review does. And if you'd
answer the question like how do you want
to do this? Do you want me to go like
really deep? Um, it would definitely
take a lot more than 5 minutes. And if
you were ingesting those codec files or
those cloud code files um yeah it also
probably took uh a little bit longer
than five minutes. Okay. But you can see
we started with just human and persona I
believe. Um but now it's like kind of
fully been broken down into a bunch of
different like subfolders. Uh we have
the human which has identity then has
preferences memory workflow um has a
bunch of stuff. And again I think the
the coolest way to look at this is to
use what we call the memory palace. Um,
so to get there, you just see
for/memory.
Just hit O. So yeah, we can see kind of
everything here. Uh, again, it's a
little bit harder to read though. Um, so
let's hit O. All right. So we're inside
the memory palace. Um, you have a full
breakdown of the context window. You can
see system is taking like 10,00 tokens.
Um, then tools. So you know, there's a
decent amount of tools attached to lot
of code by default. It's a very powerful
harness. 1K tokens. And then the
messages. So this me the messages
includes like all the stuff it was just
doing like the tool calls all the files
to the memory system and so yeah the
memory is actually not that large yet.
Um so we can look at the files and yeah
we can basically see like the full
breakdown of what's in context and
what's external. So the agent actually
in this case has not put anything in
external memory and I think that's
probably pretty fair because a lot of
the stuff you know that it's learning up
front probably makes sense to it's
really not that much information yet so
it makes sense to like keep internally.
I think what you should see is as the
agent like learns more and more about
you um and it continually is doing
things like defragging its own memory
system uh eventually you know things
should start building up instead of
external memory right because the thing
about context repositories again not
everything is treated uh equally. So
stuff that's inside of the system
folder, kind of this virtual folder. Um
it's going inside of core memory. So
it's getting pinned to the context
window. And then stuff that's outside of
system, it's visible to the agent as in
like the agent can kind of see the
directory tree, but the agent isn't
going to see the contents of the memory
by default. It has to like call a read
on the local memory um to kind of like
or the local sync of the memory to see
what the memory contents actually are.
Okay, so let's actually see if there's
anything interesting in here. Okay, so
it's clearly learning about like how to
use the repo. uh it kind of has changed
what its role is now. It says I am
Charles's long-term coding collaborator
on Leticode TypeScript CLI tool that I
myself am an instance of. That's pretty
funny. Um yeah, also you know these this
is a markdown rendering. Um so like the
actual file looks like this. We were
looking at like the pretty version of
it. Um I'm a stateful agent. I can make
context. You know this is all true. Um
okay that's cool. And yeah I think this
is another pretty cool thing. Um it
identified from the repo that it's using
conventional commits. So kind of like
wrote down a bunch of examples of like
how commits or like the commits are
written here.
It has a lot of you has other
information on like how the repo is
published. Um
it's kind of done a dissection of the
way the source code is organized. So to
be very clear like none of this
information is actually inside of like
the flat readme. Um it's not inside of
our claw.md or agents.mmd that says
inside of let code. This is all kind of
generated like on the fly by the agent
looking around the the repo. So yeah,
what one thing um to point out is if you
had done the version of this
initialization and again you can run the
initialization as much as many times as
you want. You can run it you can run it
once quickly and then run it again later
um with the extended version on. But if
you had done the version that pulls from
like the claude and codeex uh chat
history and you have like a very long
you know you're a very heavy user of
codeex CLI for example and you import
that data or you let let a code look at
it um I think what you'll notice is
actually something like this you know
this is very basic here it just it
decided that my preferences are short
direct um skip pleasantries you know
this is actually not really from any
data this was just pulled from the
question it asked me directly um but
what you'll see if you ingest your old
uh chat logs is this stuff it becomes
really detailed because an agent from
all of your chat history with clock on
codeex can actually like really infer a
lot about how you work and kind of
determine you know uh what what gets you
frustrated like how generally you want
things to to be done um yeah it's it's
really cool so would recommend trying
that out and yeah we'll make a separate
video kind of covering that specifically
but I think one of the coolest things
here is the the fact that all these
changes because they were done locally
uh by the agent using bash. The agent
committed everything. It made all the
changes. It kind of like committed all
those changes and then it pushed it to
its remote uh you know ground truth
state. We actually have like a full
commit log of what happened. So the
agent actually wrote this commit when it
like redid its memory that says it
actually tagged it with conventional
commit and it explode flat memory. It's
a 17 file hierarchical structure or 17
file hierarchal structure. Um, and it,
you know, kind of lays out what it did.
It, you know, puts a little tag on it
saying it was the co-author. Um, and
yeah, you can basically see that it
deleted the top level human block. Um,
and then it also deleted the personal
block and then it kind of blew this up
into something much more nested with a
lot more detail. So yeah, because
context repository is get backed, you
get all of this uh, really cool version
control functionality from git. I think
the last thing I want to show in this
demo is something that I think is pretty
important to do if you're using let code
as your primary coding agent. It is to
turn on or tune the reflection settings.
So you can do this by going um typing in
sleep time.
And this is going to determine how often
a background uh reflection agent um or
what we call sleeptime agent will run
and kind of reflect on your conversation
and decide to write that into memory.
There are a few different ways this can
work. Um, firstly, you can turn it off.
So, if you don't really care that much
about memory, um, you really want to
conserve tokens and you don't want
anything running um, in the background,
uh, you can just turn this off. Um, you
can also have it be like every n steps.
So, this is actually going to be like
really low, every two steps. I
definitely wouldn't recommend doing
that, but you could have like every 30
steps. So, like every 30 uh, messages in
the transcript, a background reflection
agent will get launched. I actually
think probably the best way to set this
up is to use the compaction events. So
this would be every single time the
context is compacted or kind of a
summarization happens then a sleep timer
or reflection agent gets launched. And I
think this is actually a pretty natural
way or it's a pretty natural time to run
the sort of agent because the context is
getting evicted. Something like sonnet
with a 200k context window that is a lot
of tokens. So I think generally it's
kind of like a a reasonable balance of
like how frequently you want to run this
thing. And then the two different
options here for how to run it is you
can either have it be a reminder or
force. The difference between these two
is the reminder. Actually the way it
works is it every end steps or on a
comma action event the front the the
main agent is going to be reminded hey
why don't you run a background sleep
time reflection agent. Why don't you run
one in the background and it will kind
of like uh look over things that have
happened recently and update it memory
and then the other way to do this is you
force auto launch. In this case, there's
no reminder and the the reflection agent
will just get launched automatically. So
yeah, I I think this is kind of
subjective which one you want to choose.
Um, if you want something closest to the
old style of sleeptime compute, you
probably want to do a step count. And
you would set the step count to maybe be
20, um, 25, 50 even. And then you would
have it be auto launch. So, because one
thing that can happen with, uh, the
reminder version is if the reminder
comes in, when it's not when it's not
forced, the the main agent actually
might decide like, hey, I'm not going to
do this. Like, if the agent is actually
like pretty dumb, like if your main
agent is using a really bad model, it
might not even like understand that
reminder. it might just completely
ignore it if it's doing something else,
right? Uh if you want to really optimize
for reliability, like you always want
the sleep time agent running, then would
definitely recommend turning this on
forced and then also probably setting
this to compaction event. Okay, but for
the purposes of this demo, I want to
show you what happens when a sleepet
time agent runs uh in the background
because it's going to actually mutate
the memory and it's going to push it and
we can look at that inside of the inside
of the memory pal. Um, I'm going to, for
the sake of this video, change the
trigger to be step comp based. I'm going
to set the step comp to be pretty low.
I'm set to five. And then I'm going to
set it to be a reminder because if it's
a reminder, it's a little bit more
visible uh to to you, the user. So, I
think it's a little bit easier to
understand what's going on in a in a
demo context. Okay. So, I updated the
sleep time settings and now all I need
to do is just uh spend five turns or
five steps chatting with the agent. And
I'm going to try to introduce some sort
of like new information um that
definitely is like going to be useful
for the agent to write to memory. Okay.
So I'm just saying uh yeah just wanted
to chat a bit. Nothing to do workwise.
Okay. So something you know kind of
random. Um I'm wondering about
differences in kind of wood. Why is some
wood super plasticky? I I'm
intentionally like saying something kind
of weird just because that way it will
clearly be written to like the memory as
a preference.
Okay, so it's telling me that it's not
about the wood itself, it's about the
finish.
Okay, so just continuing this
conversation about the wood thing. Um,
the idea is that, you know, probably
like the the reflection agent is going
to decide to write into its memory that
I have some sort of like fascination
with wood.
Okay, so yeah, I've been thinking about
getting into woodworking.
Okay, so I think we're getting pretty
close. I think this next message should
be what triggers it.
So now continuing to talk about would
hopefully
Here we go. Okay. Okay. So what happened
here is the agent got a reminder um kind
of a system reminder that's hidden from
the main transcript. And the reminder
was uh hey you know consider launching a
reflection sub aent so that the
reflection sub aent can run in the
background and take anything that's
happened in the recent conversation and
write it into memory. And the way
background sub aents work in let code is
generally speaking if let code launches
a sub aent the sub aent is blocking. So
the so this is what would happen if the
main agent launches like an explore sub
aent to explore parts of the repo. it
generally will launch it not in the
background. It'll launch it in the
foreground and then it kind of is like
waiting for the agent to finish. Once
the agent finishes exploring, it tells
it like what the result of the
exploration is and then the main agent
can continue. The sub agent tool, which
is also called the task tool, it
actually has the option to dispatch
agents in the background. And the
reminder about this reflection uh does
encourage the agent to dispatch the the
the reflection agent in the background,
right? Because this reflection sub
agent, it's kind of like an auxiliary
task. it's not really related to this
generally would be like coding but in
this case like this random conversation
we're having about wood. Uh so there's
no need for like the the main agent to
stall on this. Instead it's better for
the reflection to just get dispatched.
But the way this works in let code is a
reflection agent or any background sub
agent that gets run uh this is actually
event based. So right now nothing is
happening in the terminal. um I've
stopped replying, but once the sub agent
finishes running, the result of it will
actually like trigger um it'll trigger
like a new input to the agent. So the
agent kind of like will get an event
notification effectively and it'll be
able to see what happened. So you can
actually open up the AD and then you'll
be able to see the sub agent working and
it looks like it is getting close to
finishing. Um so yeah, I'm going to go
back because we'll be able to see the
notification come in. Okay, so we're
waiting for it to work. Um, and again,
the way I got to that, um, was I just
copied this link, put it into my
browser, and I could kind of see the
subision working. Um, but yeah, once it
finishes, what it's going to do is it's
going to like edit the memory. If it if
it deems that something interesting has
happened, it's going to commit it and
it's going to push it. And I think
actually it also does this in a work
tree just in case there's like many
parallel sub aents working on the memory
at the same time. But yeah, once it
pushes the memory, uh, then it kind of
sends a message or it kind of indicates
it's completed to the main agent. And
yeah, so we're basically going to see in
a few moments, um, there should be a
notification that kind of pops in to let
a code letting the main agent that I was
chatting with about wood know that the
reflection is finished. Okay, so the the
ping just came in. You can see that it
kind of like auto started. We didn't
have to send any new input.
Okay. And then I kind of like made an
initial comment because um I did kind of
stop the conversation. But if I
continued the conversation then this
would have been like a natural it would
have like been naturally injected or
naturally accued. Uh so yeah we could
have continued the conversation and then
like you know we could have done it for
like 30 minutes and then like once the
message came in it wouldn't have
necessarily interrupted the
conversation. It would have just like it
would have just let the agent know very
naturally that it the reflection had
finished running. All right. All right,
so back to the memory files. So we can
see um core memory is now 4K tokens. Um
I guess that was a lot of that was
actually like the initial work where the
main agent kind of like split it up from
two files into many files. Um but yeah,
if we go in and we look at actually
let's jump into history, we can now see
that a reflection agent. So it got kind
of got tagged with reflection. It ran on
the background um while we were having
our conversation about wood. And I'm
gonna guess Yeah, it well you can
actually a really cool thing about this
is it's all git, right? So it's it's
doing the thing where like in the get
commit message it kind of indicates at a
very high level what was this change to
memory that just happened. So if we open
this up we can see that the the
reflection sub agent it ran it said it
reviewed messages from this date to this
date the update summary was that it
added a human interest memory
documenting the woodworking interest. Uh
it said that the user likes dark woods.
That is kind of what I said. I like yeah
all this is accurate. I like smooth
shapes, natural finishes. And it says
that it was prompted by a casual
conversation about woodworking
aesthetics. You can also see that the
sub agent, it actually tagged uh its
commit. So it basically said that hey my
agent ID, the sub agent is this and this
the parent agent that spawned me is
this. Uh so this is all like very useful
information. If you ever like want to
know, hey, what happened here? Like what
was the reasoning behind this message?
Like what did the agent actually do u
when it was making these memory edits?
Well, you can just go into the AD uh or
use the API and just like grab this
agent ID and you can look at exactly
what it's doing. And yeah, so you can
see that basically there was one file
change. It was 14 lines of insert of
insertions, description, personal
interest in hobbies, and you can see
that as of 2026, February 20, February
21st, um interested in getting into
woodworking, and it also said that I
have aesthetic preferences about liking
dark woods, um attracted to smooth,
organic shapes. So yeah, I think that's
a good place to stop. Hopefully that
gave you a pretty good idea of how
context repositories works. And yeah, if
you want to try it out, it's in the
latest Letter code version. Download
Leta Code, grab the latest version, you
know, get your agent to generate some
memories, do some reflection, and then
for/memory and hit O to pop open this
context palace. And yeah, you'll
basically be able to see all of the
memories inside of your context
repository. And then also all of the
changes that have been made. Um, so
yeah, I I I think this is like the
coolest part, being able to see these
reflection agents that run in the
background and then see like exactly
what they were doing at the time if you
want to open their agent ID. Um, and
then yeah, basically seeing like all
these incremental changes happening to
memory u in this sort of git viewer. So
yeah, hope you enjoyed. Let us know what
you think. Catch us on Discord and yeah,
have fun with it. See you.